[DOC] Add a short guide for using Logstash with K8s (#14532)
elastic/logstash: docsk8s/quick-start/ls-k8s-quick-start.asciidoc

[[ls-k8s-quick-start]]
== Quick start

WARNING: This documentation is still in development and may be changed or removed in a future release.

This guide describes how to set up {ls} to deliver Kubernetes logs to {es}. The logs will be monitored by Filebeat, processed through a Logstash pipeline, and then delivered into an {es} cluster in the Kubernetes environment.

This section includes the following topics:

* <<qs-prerequisites>>
* <<qs-set-up>>
* <<qs-generate-certificate>>
* <<qs-create-elastic-stack>>
* <<qs-view-monitoring-data>>
* <<qs-tidy-up>>
* <<qs-learn-more>>

[float]
[[qs-prerequisites]]
=== Prerequisites

Before you start, there are a few things you'll need:

. A running Kubernetes cluster - For single node testing we recommend using link:https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io[Minikube], which allows you to easily run a single node Kubernetes cluster on your system. Check the `Getting Started` section for install and set up instructions.

> . A link:https://github.com/elastic/logstash/blob/feature/kubernetes/k8s/recipes/logstash-k8s-quickstart.zip[small zip file] of config files - Download and expand this archive into an empty directory on your local system. The files are described in <<sample-configuration-files,Sample configuration files>>.

Author: For now, this link to the zip file points to the K8s feature branch, so we'll need to fix this before or when that branch is merged.

[[ls-k8s-quick-start]]
== Quick start

WARNING: This documentation is still in development and may be changed or removed in a future release.

> This guide describes how to set up {ls} to monitor a Kubernetes environment. Kubernetes logs and metrics will be monitored by Filebeat and Metricbeat, respectively, processed through a Logstash pipeline, and then delivered into an Elasticsearch cluster in the Kubernetes environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide describes how to set up {ls} to deliver Kubernetes log to {es}. Kubernetes logs will be monitored by Filebeat, processed through a Logstash pipeline, and then delivered into an Elasticsearch cluster in the Kubernetes environment.
```

- logstash does not monitor Kubernetes environment. It is more like a tunnel to pass the log from filebeat to elasticsearch
- metricbeat monitors logstash metrics only. It doesn't monitor Kubernetes in the current example.

Author: Ah, I see! :-)
I've change this intro text to:
> This guide describes how to set up Logstash to deliver Kubernetes logs to Elasticsearch. The logs will be monitored by Filebeat, processed through a Logstash pipeline, and then delivered into an Elasticsearch cluster in the Kubernetes environment.

. A running Kubernetes cluster - For single node testing we recommend using link:https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io[Minikube], which allows you to easily run a single node Kubernetes cluster on your system. Check the `Getting Started` section for install and set up instructions.
. A link:https://github.com/elastic/logstash/blob/main/docsk8s/sample-files/logstash-k8s-qs.zip[small zip file] of config files - Download and expand this archive into an empty directory on your local system. The files are described in <<sample-configuration-files,Sample configuration files>>.

[float]
[[qs-set-up]]
=== Set up your environment

Let's start by getting your Minikube Kubernetes cluster up and running:

[source,sh]
--
minikube start
--

The Elastic Helm repository contains the Elastic Stack custom resource definition (CRD) files. Add the repository to your Helm repository list:

[source,sh]
--
helm repo add elastic https://helm.elastic.co && helm repo update
--

Install the `elastic-operator` custom controller, which will be used to manage the Elastic resources in your cluster:

[source,sh]
--
helm install elastic-operator elastic/eck-operator

> --

Reviewer 2: Nice! I think that simplifies things - we could also give a pointer to the elastic `helm` charts, but not require it as a prerequisite.

> --

Author: Perfect. I've changed these steps as shown:
![Screen Shot 2022-09-29 at 11 25 24 AM](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/41695641/193073445-808c368b-b4e0-43db-9a92-02093741e351.png)

elastic-operator-0   1/1     Running   4 (12m ago)   13d
--

[float]
[[qs-generate-certificate]]
=== Generate certificate files

To enable secure communication throughout your Kubernetes resources, run the sample script to generate the CA certificate files. Details about these files are in <<sample-configuration-files,Sample configuration files>>.

[source,sh]
--
./cert/generate_cert.sh
--

[source,sh]
--
Generating RSA private key, 2048 bit long modulus
.......................+++
...........................................................................+++
e is 65537 (0x10001)
Generating RSA private key, 2048 bit long modulus
..............................................+++
.............................................+++
e is 65537 (0x10001)
Signature ok
subject=/C=EU/ST=NA/O=Elastic/CN=ServerHostName
Getting CA Private Key
Generating RSA private key, 2048 bit long modulus
............+++
.......................................................................................................................................+++
e is 65537 (0x10001)
Signature ok
subject=/C=EU/ST=NA/O=Elastic/CN=ClientName
Getting CA Private Key

> --

Reviewer 2: I think that makes sense, or have it as a collapsible section

logstash-7974b9ccb9-jd5xl               1/1     Running   0              42s
--

[float]
[[qs-view-monitoring-data]]
=== View the stack monitoring data

Now that your stack monitoring data is flowing, let's access it in {kib}. 

First, enable port forwarding for the {kib} service on port `5601`. Open a second shell window and run the following:

[source,sh]
--
kubectl port-forward service/demo-kb-http 5601
--

Then, open up a web browser at address `https://localhost:5601`. Depending on your browser you may need to accept the site certificate.

Log in to {kib} using the `elastic` username and password. To obtain the password, run:

[source,sh]
--
kubectl get secret demo-es-elastic-user -o=jsonpath='{.data.elastic}' | base64 --decode; echo
--

Open the {kib} main menu and select **Management**, then **Stack Monitoring**.

Select the {ls} **Overview**, and under the **Nodes** tab select the link for the {ls} node.

image::./images/gs-logstash-node-metrics.png[{ls} metrics data in {kib}]

That's it! The Kubernetes API server metrics data is flowing through {ls} into {es} and {kib}. You can monitor the JVM Heap, CPU Utilization, and System Load data as it updates in real time.

> 

Reviewer: We can add a session to explain how the config of each component works together. Reference: https://github.com/elastic/logstash/tree/feature/kubernetes/k8s/example/beats_ls_es#configuration

I can work on this part if it is too many technical details. WDYT?

Reviewer 2: My thoughts here were to go through the config files, applying the main stack config together, then going through the ones that are relevant to logstash, one at a time, annotating the interesting parts

Something along the lines of:

```
Firstly, we'll create the `ConfigMaps` to hold logstash settings and pipeline configuration that we will refer to in the deployment configuration file. 

NOTE: we recommend setting custom JVM settings in an `LS_JAVA_OPTS` environment variable defined in the deployment configuration file, rather than creating a separate `ConfigMap` for `jvm.options`

`001-configmap.yaml`::
This contains the Logstash settings and pipeline configuration:
+
[source,yaml]
--
  ---
# ConfigMap for logstash pipeline definition
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: logstash-pipeline
  labels:
    app: logstash-demo
data:
  logstash.conf: | <1>
    input {
      beats {
        port => "5044"
        ssl => true
        ssl_certificate_authorities => ["/usr/share/logstash/config/ca.crt"] <2> 
        ssl_certificate => "/usr/share/logstash/config/server.crt" <2>
        ssl_key => "/usr/share/logstash/config/server.pkcs8.key" <2>
        ssl_verify_mode => "force_peer"
      }
    }
    output {
      elasticsearch {
        hosts => ["https://demo-es-http:9200"]
        index => "kube-apiserver-%{+YYYY.MM.dd}"
        cacert => "/usr/share/logstash/config/es_ca.crt" <2>
        user => 'elastic'
        password => '${ELASTICSEARCH_PASSWORD}' <3>
      }
    }
---
# logstash.yml definition
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: logstash-config
  labels:
    app: logstash-demo
data:
  logstash.yml: | <4>
    api.http.host: "0.0.0.0"

--

<1> This `data` section represents a full 
<2> Keys and certificates to secure communication between logstash and the rest of the stack. These are volumes that will be defined in the deployment configuration file
<3> The `ELASTICSEARCH_PASSWORD` is an environmental variable that will be defined in the deployment configuration file, using secrets created by the `Elasticsearch` CRD
<4> The `logstash.yml` `ConfigMap` should include all logstash.yml<LINK_TO_MAIN_DOC> settings that you wish to change from the default settings
```

WDYT?

(I may remove the boilerplate `apiVersion, kind, metadata` sections, and just stick to the `data:` section)

Author: Going through the Logstash files step by step sounds good to me!

Note that I stuck some detail about each of the config files, and how they're supposed to work together, in the [list of sample files](https://github.com/elastic/logstash/pull/14532/files#diff-44011a051f96a1797c66cf219b2cb83c8ee18dadc4e6500ff7716c88e27c9e1b). We may want to remove some of that content, or maybe just scrap that page altogether, if we're explaining most of the files on the main Quick Start page. Just a thought.

[[ls-k8s-quick-start]]
== Quick start

WARNING: This documentation is still in development and may be changed or removed in a future release.

This guide describes how to set up {ls} to monitor a Kubernetes environment running on Minikube. Kubernetes logs and metrics will be monitored by Filebeat and Metricbeat, respectively, processed through a Logstash pipeline, and then delivered into an Elasticsearch cluster in the Kubernetes environment.

This section includes the following topics:

* <<qs-prerequisites>>
* <<qs-set-up>>
* <<qs-generate-certificate>>
* <<qs-create-elastic-stack>>
* <<qs-view-monitoring-data>>
* <<qs-tidy-up>>
* <<qs-learn-more>>

[float]
[[qs-prerequisites]]
=== Prerequisites

Before you start, there are a few things you'll need:

. link:https://helm.sh/[Helm] - The package manager for Kubernetes. We'll use Helm to access the Elastic Kubernetes resources. 
. link:https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io[Minikube] - Easily run a single node Kubernetes cluster on your system. Check the `Getting Started` section for install and set up instructions.

> . A link:https://github.com/elastic/logstash/blob/main/docsk8s/sample-files/logstash-k8s-qs.zip[small zip file] of config files - Download and expand this archive into an empty directory on your local system. The files are described in <<sample-configuration-files,Sample configuration files>>.

Author: Definitely we should. I can move the zip file over, add a description to the `recipes` folder readme, and then update this link. @robbavey, should I just commit directly to the `feature/kubernetes` branch to do that?

> . A link:https://github.com/elastic/logstash/blob/main/docsk8s/sample-files/logstash-k8s-qs.zip[small zip file] of config files - Download and expand this archive into an empty directory on your local system. The files are described in <<sample-configuration-files,Sample configuration files>>.

Reviewer 2: Yes please

> . A link:https://github.com/elastic/logstash/blob/main/docsk8s/sample-files/logstash-k8s-qs.zip[small zip file] of config files - Download and expand this archive into an empty directory on your local system. The files are described in <<sample-configuration-files,Sample configuration files>>.

Author: The zip file is now in the `Recipes` folder on the feature branch, [here](https://github.com/elastic/logstash/blob/feature/kubernetes/k8s/recipes/logstash-k8s-quickstart.zip). I added an entry in the readme explaining what it is, and that the book is still under development. The link to the book is broken for now but should work once this PR is merged.

..............................................+++
.............................................+++
e is 65537 (0x10001)
Signature ok
subject=/C=EU/ST=NA/O=Elastic/CN=ServerHostName
Getting CA Private Key
Generating RSA private key, 2048 bit long modulus
............+++
.......................................................................................................................................+++
e is 65537 (0x10001)
Signature ok
subject=/C=EU/ST=NA/O=Elastic/CN=ClientName
Getting CA Private Key
--

Your `logstash-k8s-gs/cert` folder should now contain a set of certificate files, including `client` certificates for Filebeat and Metricbeat, and `server` certificates for Logstash. 

The parent `logstash-k8s-gs` directory also has a new `001-secret.yaml` resources file that stores a hash of the client and server certificates.

image::./images/gs-cert-files.png[generated CA certificate files]

[float]
[[qs-create-elastic-stack]]
=== Create an Elastic Stack

Now that your environment and certificates are set up, it's time to create an Elastic Stack. Run the following command to deploy the example using the sample CRDs:

[source,sh]
--

> kubectl apply -f .

Reviewer 2: This is something I'll take on as part of this sprint @kilfoyle

--

The resources are created:

[source,sh]
--
elasticsearch.elasticsearch.k8s.elastic.co/demo created
configmap/logstash-pipeline created
configmap/logstash-config created
secret/logstash-beats-tls created
deployment.apps/logstash created
service/logstash created
horizontalpodautoscaler.autoscaling/logstash created
beat.beat.k8s.elastic.co/demo created
beat.beat.k8s.elastic.co/demo configured
kibana.kibana.k8s.elastic.co/demo created
--

[source,sh]
--
kubectl get pods
--

The pods are starting up. You may need to wait a minute or two for all of them to be ready.

[source,sh]
--
NAME                                    READY   STATUS    RESTARTS       AGE
demo-beat-filebeat-7f4d97f69f-qkkbl     1/1     Running   0              42s
demo-beat-metricbeat-59f4b68cc7-9zrrn   1/1     Running   0              39s
demo-es-default-0                       1/1     Running   0              41s
demo-kb-d7f585494-vbf6s                 1/1     Running   0              39s
elastic-operator-0                      1/1     Running   4 (164m ago)   13d
logstash-7974b9ccb9-jd5xl               1/1     Running   0              42s
--

[float]
[[qs-view-monitoring-data]]

> === View the monitoring data

Reviewer 2: This feels a little ambiguous - does the monitoring data mean stack monitoring? Or the data we are putting in the `kube-apiserver`? 

Maybe we can split this into "verify data" and "view stack monitoring"? Or something along those lines

Author: Since I've removed the part about viewing indices I think now we're only viewing stack monitoring info (i.e., what appears in the Kibana visualization: JVM Heap, CPU, and System Load data), so I've updated the text to `View the stack monitoring data`.

Now that your monitoring data is flowing, let's access it in {kib}. 

First, enable port forwarding for the {kib} service on port `5601`. Open a second shell window and run the following:

[source,sh]
--
kubectl port-forward service/demo-kb-http 5601
--

Then, open up a web browser at address `https://localhost:5601`. Depending on your browser you may need to accept the site certificate.

Log in to {kib} using the `elastic` username and password. To obtain the password, run:

[source,sh]
--
kubectl get secret demo-es-elastic-user -o=jsonpath='{.data.elastic}' | base64 --decode; echo
--

Open the {kib} main menu and select **Management**, then **Dev Tools**.

> In the **Console**, get a list of all indexes:

Author: Makes sense. I'll remove the bit about looking at the indices in the next commit.
